\input texinfo   @c -*-texinfo-*-

@set title Lab 2: Processor Exceptions
@set subtitle Computer Architecture
@set splash1 lab_2_processor_exceptions-splash.texi
@set splash2 westminster-splash.texi
@set author Scott Overholser
@set category Laboratory
@set filename lab_2_processor_exceptions

@comment %**start of header
@setchapternewpage off
@setfilename @value{filename}.info
@settitle @value{title}
@finalout
@comment %**end of header

@include @value{filename}.texi.updated
@include copying.texi

@titlepage
@title @value{title}
@subtitle @value{subtitle}
@include @value{splash1}
@author @value{author}

@c Secondary title page.
@page
@include @value{splash2}
@vskip 0pt plus 1filll
@insertcopying
@end titlepage

@comment Table of Contents
@contents

@dircategory @value{category}
@direntry
* Texinfo Doc Template         Template for Creating New Docs
@end direntry

@include headings.texi
@include constants.texi

@ifnottex
@node Top
@top @value{title}

@insertcopying
@end ifnottex

@comment This is the Chapter Menu
@menu
* Introduction::            Introduction
* Lab Objective::           Lab Objective
* Notes::                   Notes
* Experiments::             Experiments
* Lab Report::              Lab Report
@end menu

@node Introduction
@chapter Introduction
@noindent
Lab 2 will build on your familiarity with the development environment and
first experience programming the LaunchPad in @uref{https://westminster.instructure.com/courses/1487106/files/folder/Labs?preview=63874338, Lab 1}. It will expand the
complexity and functionality of the programming project.

@node Lab Objective
@chapter Lab Objective
@noindent
In this lab you will learn what processor exceptions are and how they are
handled. The scope will include the following:

@itemize
@item How the processor handles fault conditions.
@item How the processor manages the stack.
@item Understanding vector table in more detail than in @uref{https://westminster.instructure.com/courses/1487106/files/folder/Labs?preview=63874338,Lab 1}.
@item Understanding context switching.
@item Introduce clock gating.
@end itemize

@noindent
You will also understand that the data sheet is an indispensable resource for
understanding the functionality of the LaunchPad.

@node Notes
@chapter Notes
@noindent
At this point you should be getting familiar with your development environment.
This should mean less technical support problems and more focus on the
experiments.

@noindent
Be sure to connect your USB cable to the debug port on the LaunchPad. Also
confirm that the switch is in the debug position.

@noindent
Take notes of your results and observations as you proceed. These notes should
be used as you write your lab report.

@section Reference Material
@noindent
@uref{https://westminster.instructure.com/files/62246649/download?download_frd=1&verifier=hkiu21FqwDA10ZbhaXkJGY4SDvWC55QpRD9xEpo7, Tiva TM4C123GH6PM Microcontroller Data Sheet}
will be referenced often in this and future labs. It is in the Canvas Files
area filed under Tiva C Series Microcontroller. The filename is
@file{tm4c123gh6pm.pdf}. Please download this file to your computer.

@noindent
Refer to the following in the TM4C data sheet.
@itemize
@item @cite{2.3.2 Stacks} on page 74.
@item @cite{2.5.4 Vector Table} on page 107.
@item @cite{2.5.7.1 Exception Entry} on page 109.
@item @cite{Register 60: General-Purpose Input/Output Run Mode Clock Gating Control (RCGCGPIO), offset 0x608} on page 340.
@end itemize

@node Experiments
@chapter Experiments
@noindent
Download the
@uref{https://westminster.instructure.com/files/63918170/download?download_frd=1&verifier=F9hNR6hKu5bcFRjpuKXZ3SHnzheig9S6qDRtE3Ev, Lab 2 Project}.
It is a zip file that will extract into it's own directory. It is an IAR
Embedded Workbench project. Choose a location and extract the project.

@noindent
Review the code. It is well commented. Notice the familiar parts from
@uref{https://westminster.instructure.com/courses/1487106/files/folder/Labs?preview=63874338,Lab 1}.
You should recognize the first two items in the vector table from the project
in lab 1. The stack pointer is now set just a bit differently but it is still
the same value.

@noindent
Notice the new entries in the vector table. Refer to the data sheet for a list
of processor exceptions. Each of the symbols is resolved to a memory location
by the linker at compile time. Each one of the fault handlers is attached to a
single instruction @code{B .} that loops forever.

@section Run The Code
@noindent
Start the IAR Embedded Workbench by double-clicking on the @file{workspace.eww}
file. Build the executable and then download and debug. Execution will stop at
the location of @code{main}.

@noindent
Carefully review the data sheet @cite{2.5.7.1 Exception Entry} section to
familiarize yourself with the process of context switching on interrupt
handling. Note the contents of your registers in the register view.

@noindent
Single step through the code until the processor exception is triggered. Step
into the fault handler. Again note the contents of your registers in the
register view. In particular, note the value of the @code{SP} register.

@noindent
In the memory view, click into the @emph{Go To} field and enter the value of
the @code{SP} register. This is known as the top of the stack. Compare the
contents of the stack in RAM with the register contents of your registers
you noted prior to the processor exception being triggered.

@noindent
Read the data sheet @cite{2.3.2 Stacks} section to understand how the processor
uses the stack.

@section Create HardFault Handler
@noindent
If you are not still running your code in the debugger, again select Download
and Debug. Execution will stop at @code{main}. Leave it there.

@noindent
Carefully review @cite{2.5.4 Vector Table} on page 107 of the data sheet. In
the memory view, click into the @emph{Go To} field and enter @code{0x0} to
view the beginning of flash memory. You will be looking for the vector table.
Make a note of each 4-byte value in the vector table that corresponds to the
vector table in your source code. You will begin with the Stack Pointer at
@code{0x0000}, Reset at @code{0x0004}, etc@dots{}

@noindent
Note at this point that each of the entries in the vector table that correspond
to fault handlers are pointing to the same location in memory. We will change
that. Stop debugging.

@noindent
To illustrate how the processor handles interrupts using the vector table,
break out @code{HardFault_Handler} from the other fault handlers that are
all grouped together. The following diff shows how it is done:

@verbatim
--- a/lab_2-processor_exceptions/main.s
+++ b/lab_2-processor_exceptions/main.s
@@ -35,7 +35,6 @@ __iar_program_start

 ; Processor Exception Handlers. Attach them all to this loop.
 NMI_Handler
-HardFault_Handler
 MemManage_Handler
 BusFault_Handler
 UsageFault_Handler
@@ -46,6 +45,9 @@ SysTick_Handler
         B       .               ; Loop here forever.
                                 ; Now look at the stack!

+HardFault_Handler
+        B       .               ; Handle this separately
+
 ; The main loop.
 main    NOP                     ; Just for ease of editing.
         BL      CauseMemFault   ; Note the SP register
@end verbatim

@noindent
Rebuild your code. Then download and debug. Single-step through the code in the
disassembly window until the hard fault is once again triggered. The new
@code{HardFault_Handler} code should now be executing. Does this confirm the
function of the vector table?

@noindent
Exit IAR Embedded Workbench. Delete your lab 2 project directory and extract
again from the zip file you downloaded earlier.

@section Run Mode Clock Gating
@noindent
Double click on the @file{workspace.eww} file in the lab 2 project you
extracted at the end of the last experiment. Apply the changes described
in the following diff:

@verbatim
--- a/lab_2-processor_exceptions/main.s
+++ b/lab_2-processor_exceptions/main.s
@@ -48,6 +48,7 @@ SysTick_Handler

 ; The main loop.
 main    NOP                     ; Just for ease of editing.
+        BL      GPIOF_Enable
         BL      CauseMemFault   ; Note the SP register
         B       main

@@ -60,7 +61,15 @@ CauseMemFault
         NOP                     ; Pause, wait for it...!
         BX      LR              ; Return to caller

+GPIOF_Enable
+        LDR     R0, rcgcgpio
+        MOVS    R1, #0x00U      ; Replace this with the correct value
+        STR     R1, [R0]        ; In memory view, goto 0x40025000 before execute
+        BX      LR
+
         DATA
 datF    DC32    0x400253FCU     ; GPIOF data all bits
+rcgcgpio
+        DC32    0x400FE608U     ; GPIO Run Mode Clock Gating Register

         END
@end verbatim

@noindent
Carefully review the new code that you have just added to @file{main.s} in
your lab 2 project. Note the instruction that is commented with ``Replace
this with the correct value.'' You will be reading the data sheet and
determining the value to use in that @code{MOVS} operand.

@noindent
Study the RCGCGPIO register description On page 340 of the TM4C data sheet.
This describes how to enable GPIO Port F. Once you understand how to program
the RCGCGPIO register to enable GPIO Port F, return to your program and enter
that value in place of @code{0x00} on the line referenced above.

@noindent
Rebuild your code. Then download and debug. Single-step through the code in the
disassembly window until you reach the @code{STR} instruction with the comment
``In memory view, goto 0x40025000 before execute.'' Before continuing in
the debugger, go to the memory view, click inside the @emph{Go To} field and
enter @code{0x40025000}.

@noindent
Now click step-into and execute the @code{STR R1, [R0]} instruction while
observing the memory view window. What happens?

@noindent
Continue single stepping through your code in the disassembly view until you
return to the @code{CauseMemFault} section of code. Watch carefully as you
single step through the code. What happens?


@node Lab Report
@chapter Lab Report
@noindent
Write a lab report that explains what you did and learned. Explain how the
processor is designed to handle fault conditions. Explain the vector table.
How does the stack work. What is context switching? What does the point and
how does it work?

@noindent
Finishing off with clock gating sets the stage for the next lab. You should
now understand why the hard fault was caused in the first two experiments
but not in the last. Explain this in your lab report.

@noindent
And, as always, let's keep the focus on the subject of Computer Architecture.
How does this lab relate to Computer Architecture?

@bye
